---
layout: post
title:  "Step 1: Have Dreams"
date:   2017-06-02 19:55:55 -0700
categories: Step1, procrastination
---
_Disclaimer: The following is not humble. I am the audience for these posts. This writing is motivational, and a snapshot of how I'm thinking about things at this moment._

I think, in order to live a fulfilled life, it's important to have meaningful pursuits.

It's easy, I think, in the Silicon Valley culture to dream of startups and making it big and building an impact. In fact, the phrase "Make an impact" seems to be the number one motivating factor for young people working in Silicon Valley. 

The classically successful people in college are also those who are most disciplined, focused, attentive, and work through their classes diligently. I would say that most of my closest friends are like this. They were very focused on a certain goal from a young age - get here. That is what success is. 

For the longest time, I could never do this. Getting a job in "real-life" is not success. Being well-off, a secure future, that is not success. Yet I had no true alternatives for what a meaningful life looked like.

As a result, my personally achieavable goals were all short-term and hedonistic. With the lack of a grander meaning, my interest defaults to what will give me the most current pleasure. I enjoyed learning for the sake of learning, but only when learning itself was a joy or the topic was interesting on its own merits. Without meaningful dreams, discipline, focus and attentiveness cannot possibly be high priorities. The result - I would skip classes. I would write essays the day of. I would pull multiple all-nighters, studying for tests. The procrastination itself became a meaningful pursuit, because the amount of focus that I would attain through urgency of a due date was *fun*. There's no discipline here. There is only hedonistic pleasure. 

There was only one other motivating factor in my life that ever had me pursue stronger, greater goals - people. The people in my life that needed me or relied on me, or the people who worked alongside me as a peer, there is no way I would ever allow myself to let them down.
But for myself? How could I be motivated to accomplish goals for myself?
Hedonism only works for so long.

I've graduated. Society has said "this is what success looks like."
I have a good job. I get paid well. I live comfortably. This is what success looks like. 
And I'm sure for my friends who have their goal that they were pursuing and and grander goals that they were pursuing, this is the best experience of their life. 
But in life, the goals are no longer explicitly and outwardly defined. It is now my time to pursue my own goals.

So I've spent a good few months trying to figure out what I'm truly interested in, what do I really want to do? 
I have some not-so-current dreams: become a good dad, become a good teacher. In a world seemingly dedicated to becoming isolated and insular, I want to be the catalyst to the children of the next generation, my children to embrace the greater world without fear, at least without my own prejudices.


But my current dream - 
I spent four years attending philosophy conferences and meetings in Santa Clara while being discouraged by advisors to pursue anything outside of engineering. 
No one is here to discourage me further.
The interesection of Philosophy and Computer Science is a such a profound area of study that I found curricula that was purely dedicated to it in Stanford, in the field of Symbolic Systems.
It is literally the frontier of discovery in how technology will affect us in our daily lives. It asks the question, what does it mean to be living? To be ethical?
It is highly interdisciiplinary, so there's none of the discouragement from peers or faculty that only one school's progress is truly important.
And the best part? There's absolutely no question of it being useful to society. To the people around me whom I will work with and for. To the children of the next generation.
so it's pretty exciting. 


So here's the dream: 
*Learn about Symbolic Systems and Philosophy to the point where I could be considered for the grad programs at Stanford.*
*also maybe get into the Knight-Hennessey Program because when you have impossible dreams, why not have two?*

I need to spend more time on "why these dreams in particular" but also, I want to record on the modern stone tablet - Roshan finally has a dream.
A dream for himself as well as for others. Not just hedonistic, but not purely in the service of other people either.

Having a dream is not enough though. You also need to save them.

You can find other projects and general tomfoolery on my [main website here](http://tzeak.com).
