---
layout: post
title:  "Philosophy of Psychology Notes - Chapter 2"
date:   2017-07-12 19:55:55 -0700
categories: bookclub
---
Weekly Book Club: Philosophy of Psychology, by José Luis Bermúdez

Chapter 2: Levels of Psychological Explanation and the Interface Problem 
* Explanation at different levels
* Personal and subpersonal levels of explanation
* Horizontal explanation, verticial explanation, and commonsense psychology
* The interface problem and four pictures of the mind


*Explanation at different levels*
* Bottom-up vs Top-Down
	* Bottom-up focuses on looking at the individual neurons or even lower at the molecular interactions and building our way back up via reverse engineering
	* Top-down starts with general theories and looks for implementation in the brain. 
	* Daniel Dennett - posits *intentional* stance, separate from the *design* stance, separate from the *physical* stance. Who knows what this means. We'll learn more when we read *Consciousness Explained*
	* David Marr has a good example of top-down explanation in his model of the Human Visual system
* David Marr's "Levels" of explanation
	* Can be split into the Computational, Algorithmic, and Implementational levels.
	* Computational: General constraints posed by the particular type of task that is being carried out.
		* since cognition is ultimately information-processing, computational identifies input to a system and output from the system. (e.g visual stimulus to object/concept recognition)
	* Algorithmic: Information-processing instructions. Focuses on representation of input and output through manipulation of steps.
	* Implementational: Finding a physical realization for the algorithm.
* Example: David Marr's Visual System
	* 

